Terraform init hooks tutorial (#1376)
localstack/docs: content/en/tutorials/using-terraform-with-testcontainers-and-localstack/index.md

### Using init hooks directly 

Let's first have a look at how you can leverage Terraform init hooks to configure services directly in LocalStack at startup. 
After establishing this foundation, we will proceed to integrate these configurations with Testcontainers to further enhance our development and testing workflow.

To use Terraform configuration files as initialization hooks in LocalStack, start by installing the necessary extension with the configuration flag 
**`EXTENSION_AUTO_INSTALL="localstack-extension-terraform-init"`**. This will install both `Terraform` and `tflocal` into your LocalStack container. 
Mount your `main.tf` file directly into the **`/etc/localstack/init/ready.d`** directory. Upon LocalStack's startup, if a `main.tf` is detected in any init stage directory,
the extension will automatically execute **`tflocal init`** and **`tflocal apply`** within that directory.

{{< callout "note">}}
If you're new to Terraform, you can quickly familiarize yourself with the basic commands by reading the [getting started tutorials](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/aws-change) 
on their official documentation page.
{{< /callout >}}

> If you mount a directory instead of a single file, the AWS Terraform provider does not need to be downloaded each time, and any state files created will be in your 
> host directory, potentially requiring `sudo` to modify or delete.

Reviewer: tried to clarify a bit, though it's longer now.
```suggestion
Since the initialization hook runs `terraform init`, the AWS Terraform provider will be downloaded in the container every every time.
You can avoid this by mounting a directory instead of a single file.
Any Terraform state including the `.terraform` folder that includes the provider, will be cached on your host directory, however they may require `sudo` permissions to modify or delete, as they are created by the container.
```

#### Examples

##### LocalStack CLI

In the root folder of the demo project run:

```bash
$ export LOCALSTACK_AUTH_TOKEN=<your_auth_token>
$ localstack start -e EXTENSION_AUTO_INSTALL=localstack-extension-terraform-init 
                -v ./terraform/main.tf:/etc/localstack/init/ready.d/main.tf 
                -v ./target/product-lambda.jar:/etc/localstack/init/ready.d/target/product-lambda.jar
```

> This is the easiest way to quickly spin up the necessary resources at startup.

Reviewer: nit: could use some clarification

With 'necessary resources', are you referring to the AWS resources created by terraform (then 'necessary' presumably refers to the users necessity for the resources?), or do you mean the extension and terraform state files ('necessary' referring to necessary files to run the terraform commands)

If Docker gives you any trouble regarding mounting permissions, you can add `$(pwd)` in front of the local paths, to turn them into
absolute paths.

##### Docker compose

Another way of easily starting LocalStack with the desired resources is using `docker compose`. In the root folder, there is a 
[`docker-compose.yml`](https://github.com/localstack-samples/terraform-init-hooks-demo/blob/main/docker-compose.yml) file with all the essential configs:

Environment Variables:
- **LOCALSTACK_AUTH_TOKEN**: Required for using LocalStack Pro.
- **DEBUG**: Set to 1 to enable verbose logging of the container.
- **EXTENSION_AUTO_INSTALL**: Automatically installs specified LocalStack [extensions](https://docs.localstack.cloud/user-guide/extensions/), in this case, `localstack-extension-terraform-init` which allows Terraform files to be directly used as init hooks.

Volumes:
- Docker Socket: Mounts the Docker socket `/var/run/docker.sock` from the host into the container. This allows LocalStack to manage Docker containers directly, facilitating functionalities like spinning up Lambda containers.

> - Terraform Configuration: Mounts a directory containing Terraform files (./terraform) from the host to `/etc/localstack/init/ready.d` in the container. This enables the use of init hooks, as well as the AWS provider (plugins and modules) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Terraform Configuration: Mounts a directory containing Terraform files (`./terraform`) from the host to `/etc/localstack/init/ready.d` in the container. This enables the use of init hooks, as well as the AWS provider (plugins and modules) 
```

                                                      "description": "A durable, eco-friendly water bottle designed to keep your drinks cold for up to 24 hours.",
                                                      "price": "29.99"
                                                    }'
Product added/updated successfully.
```
To check if the product object has been persisted to the database, we can fire a GET request against the same URL, using the product ID as a query param:
```bash
$ curl --location "http://ixqd52qrip.execute-api.localhost.localstack.cloud:4566/dev/productApi?id=34534"

{"price":"29.99","name":"EcoFriendly Water Bottle","description":"A durable, eco-friendly water bottle designed to keep your drinks cold for up to 24 hours.","id":"34534"}
```

### Integrating with Testcontainers

#### The setup

Now that we've established how seamlessly LocalStack integrates with Terraform using initialization hooks, let's explore how we can leverage this setup to enhance our testing
processes using [Testcontainers](https://testcontainers.com/). This demo is a Java project, but the framework supports multiple other programming languages.

> We can now automate and streamline our LocalStack configurations, ensuring that every test suite includes a fresh, fully configured environment. This helps users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can now automate and streamline our LocalStack setup, ensuring that every test suite includes a fresh, fully configured AWS environment. This helps users
```

                    "  \"id\": \"34534\",\n" +
                    "  \"name\": \"EcoFriendly Water Bottle\",\n" +
                    "  \"description\": \"A durable, eco-friendly water bottle.\",\n" +
                    "  \"price\": \"29.99\"\n" +
                    "}";

            // set the request body
            var entity = new StringEntity(jsonRequestBody);
            httpPost.setEntity(entity);
            // execute the request
            try (CloseableHttpResponse response = httpClient.execute(httpPost)) {
                String responseBody = EntityUtils.toString(response.getEntity());
                //assert 200 OK status & response message
                Assertions.assertEquals(HttpStatus.SC_OK, response.getStatusLine().getStatusCode());
                Assertions.assertEquals(expectedResponse, responseBody);
            }
        } catch (IOException e) {
            throw new RuntimeException(e);
        }
    }
```

It is now incredibly straightforward to utilize our Terraform configuration file directly to construct the exact, production-ready environment needed for effective testing.

### About owner permissions

> It's important to note that this extension is still new and primarily intended for straightforward Terraform configurations. It may suffer improvement changes in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's important to note that this extension is still new and primarily intended for straightforward Terraform configurations. It is subject to change and improvements in the future.
```

If you mount a directory instead of a single file, the AWS Terraform provider will not be downloaded each time the `init` command runs, and any state files created will be in your host directory, 
potentially requiring `sudo` to modify or delete. The reason for this is that the container user that creates these files is `root`, and on Linux systems this will propagate 

> to your local files. MacOS, on the other hand, will not allow this to happen and your locally created files will belong to your user. Here's how it looks like:

Reviewer: there's repetition here with a previous paragraph where we already explained this.

##### In the LocalStack container

```bash
drwxr-xr-x 8 root root   256 Jul 10 15:26 .
drwxr-xr-x 1 root root  4096 Jul 10 15:24 ..
drwxr-xr-x 3 root root    96 Jul 10 07:28 .terraform
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root  1406 Jul 10 07:28 .terraform.lock.hcl
-rwxrwxrwx 1 root root  5563 Jul  7 06:51 main.tf
drwxr-xr-x 3 root root    96 Jul 10 07:28 target
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 23620 Jul 10 15:26 terraform.tfstate
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 23620 Jul 10 15:25 terraform.tfstate.backup
```

##### On MacOS

```bash
drwxr-xr-x@  9 user  staff    288 Jul 10 00:28 ./
drwxr-xr-x@ 19 user  staff    608 Jul 10 00:28 ../
drwxr-xr-x   3 user  staff     96 Jul 10 00:28 .terraform/
-rw-r--r--   1 user  staff   1406 Jul 10 00:28 .terraform.lock.hcl
-rw-------   1 user  staff    202 Jul 10 00:28 .terraform.tfstate.lock.info
-rw-r--r--   1 user  staff   3798 Jul 10 00:28 localstack_providers_override.tf
-rwxrwxrwx@  1 user  staff   5563 Jul  6 23:51 main.tf
drwxr-xr-x   3 user  staff     96 Jul 10 00:28 target/
-rw-r--r--   1 user  staff  17338 Jul 10 00:29 terraform.tfstate
```

### Using multiple TF files

> When organizing your Terraform files into folders, recursion can be a highly effective strategy. This approach allows you to manage multiple Terraform projects within a single structure efficiently. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Organizing multiple Terraform files into subfolders can be a highly effective strategy. This approach allows you to manage multiple Terraform projects within a single structure efficiently.
```

> This feature supports recursive script execution, which can be useful for various scenarios.

Reviewer: maybe delete this line
```suggestion
```

The scripts are executed using a preorder traversal method, where each level of the directory hierarchy is processed in alphabetical order. This ensures a consistent and predictable 
execution sequence. For example, consider the following directory structure:

```bash
ready.d/myscript.sh
ready.d/a/script_0.sh
ready.d/a/aa/script_0.sh
ready.d/a/aa/script_2.sh
ready.d/b/script_0.sh
```

This alphabetical and hierarchical execution strategy helps maintain an organized and logical flow, making it easier to manage and execute complex Terraform projects.

## Conclusion

> Leveraging Terraform init hooks allows us to precisely replicate our production infrastructure within our testing environments, ensuring that our Infrastructure as Code is

Reviewer: i think precisely replicating our production infrastructure is maybe not focusing on the real benefits of the terraform init hooks. perhaps focusing on the aspects of automation (configurations being automatically applied), the setup being self-contained (both the extension being installed), and reproducability (we can easily reproduce the same setup every time).

Author: Thanks for the review! I needed a fresh pair of eyes for this because I was getting sick of reading my own text over and over. You were right, I dislike repeating words in the same phrase, even in the same paragraph, but somehow I managed to repeat myself with the same idea, different words. I made the suggested changes and also replaced the ambiguous wording. I also tried to be more mindful of the one sentence per line (I broke it up because of the small screen).

This tutorial guides you through using LocalStack's [**new extension**](https://github.com/localstack/localstack-extensions/tree/main/terraform-init) that supports Terraform configuration files as initialization hooks, and will show you how to leverage this new feature, and integrate it with Testcontainers for seamless testing.
This approach simplifies the development and testing cycle, making it more efficient and closely aligned with real AWS infrastructure practices.

## Prerequisites

For this tutorial, you will need:

- [LocalStack Pro](https://docs.localstack.cloud/getting-started/auth-token/) to emulate the AWS services and to use LocalStack Extensions. If you don't have LocalStack Pro yet, you can sign up on our [webapp](https://app.localstack.cloud) to get a trial license for free.
- [Docker](https://docker.io/)
- [LocalStack CLI](https://docs.localstack.cloud/getting-started/installation/)
- [AWS CLI](https://aws.amazon.com/cli/)
- Optional for building the Lambda functions: [Java 17](https://openjdk.org/install/)
- Optional for building the Lambda functions: [Apache Maven 3.9.8](https://maven.apache.org/install.html)

> - Optional: [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli) and [terraform-local](https://github.com/localstack/terraform-local)

Reviewer 2: Maybe keep an optional pointer and put them together

> - Optional for building the Lambda functions: [Java 17](https://openjdk.org/install/)
> - Optional for building the Lambda functions: [Apache Maven 3.9.8](https://maven.apache.org/install.html)
> - Optional: [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli) and [terraform-local](https://github.com/localstack/terraform-local)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Optional for building the Lambda functions: [Java 17](https://openjdk.org/install/)
- Optional for building the Lambda functions: [Apache Maven 3.9.8](https://maven.apache.org/install.html)
- Optional: [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli) and [`tflocal`](https://github.com/localstack/terraform-local)
```

## Project overview

You can get hands-on with this setup by cloning the [**demo repository**](https://github.com/localstack-samples/terraform-init-hooks-demo). 
The diagram below illustrates how everything within the project connects.

The application is simple, yet it reflects a realistic scenario: there's an API Gateway that directs requests to two Lambda functions.
One Lambda function fetches product details by ID, and the other saves new products to a DynamoDB database. A CloudWatch Logs instance is used to store and access the Lambda log files.

![architecture-diagram](architecture-diagram.png)

> ## Using Terraform init hooks

Reviewer 2: Can we stick with `init hooks` or `Init Hooks`?

Author: it's init hooks everywhere

{{< command >}}
version: "3.8"

services:
    localstack:
        container_name: "${LOCALSTACK_DOCKER_NAME:-localstack-main}"
        image: localstack/localstack-pro:latest  # required for Pro
        ports:
            - "127.0.0.1:4566:4566"            # LocalStack Gateway
            - "127.0.0.1:4510-4559:4510-4559"  # external services port range
            - "127.0.0.1:443:443"              # LocalStack HTTPS Gateway (Pro)
        environment:
            # Activate LocalStack Pro: https://docs.localstack.cloud/getting-started/auth-token/
            - LOCALSTACK_AUTH_TOKEN=${LOCALSTACK_AUTH_TOKEN:?}  # required for Pro
            # LocalStack configuration: https://docs.localstack.cloud/references/configuration/
            - DEBUG=1
            - PERSISTENCE=${PERSISTENCE:-0}
            - EXTENSION_AUTO_INSTALL=localstack-extension-terraform-init
        volumes:
            - "${LOCALSTACK_VOLUME_DIR:-./volume}:/var/lib/localstack"
            - "/var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock"
            - "./terraform:/etc/localstack/init/ready.d"
            - "./target/product-lambda.jar:/etc/localstack/init/ready.d/target/product-lambda.jar"

> {{< / command >}}

Reviewer 2: Not exactly a command — use code formatting to leverage YAML syntax highlighting

Volumes:
- Docker Socket: Mounts the Docker socket `/var/run/docker.sock` from the host into the container. This allows LocalStack to manage Docker containers directly, facilitating functionalities like spinning up Lambda containers.
- Terraform Configuration: Mounts a directory containing Terraform files (./terraform) from the host to `/etc/localstack/init/ready.d` in the container. This enables the use of init hooks, as well as the AWS provider (plugins and modules) which is downloaded once and reused in subsequent startups.
- Lambda Function JAR: Places the `product-lambda.jar` file from the host into the `/etc/localstack/init/ready.d/target` directory in the container, making it available for use, as described in `main.tf`.

After running `docker compose up`, we should keep an eye on the container logs until the `Ready.` message appears.

Now we can test the functionality of our stack by running the following commands:

```bash

> $ aws apigateway get-rest-apis --query 'items[?name==`product-api-gateway`].id' --endpoint http://localhost.localstack.cloud:4566

Reviewer 2: Why not use `awslocal`?

Author: so the list of things to install is not too long

[
    "ixqd52qrip"

> ]

Reviewer 2: Wrap this around disable-copy shortcode

```

This will get us the ID of the API Gateway, which is necessary to build the URL:

```bash
$ curl --location "http://ixqd52qrip.execute-api.localhost.localstack.cloud:4566/dev/productApi" \
                                                        --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
                                                        --data '{
                                                      "id": "34534",
                                                      "name": "EcoFriendly Water Bottle",
                                                      "description": "A durable, eco-friendly water bottle designed to keep your drinks cold for up to 24 hours.",
                                                      "price": "29.99"
                                                    }'

> Product added/updated successfully.

Reviewer 2: Wrap this around disable-copy shortcode

```
To check if the product object has been persisted to the database, we can fire a GET request against the same URL, using the product ID as a query param:
```bash
$ curl --location "http://ixqd52qrip.execute-api.localhost.localstack.cloud:4566/dev/productApi?id=34534"

> {"price":"29.99","name":"EcoFriendly Water Bottle","description":"A durable, eco-friendly water bottle designed to keep your drinks cold for up to 24 hours.","id":"34534"}

Reviewer 2: Wrap this around disable-copy shortcode

```

### Integrating with Testcontainers

> #### The setup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Setup
```

Author: this stays with "The tests"

Here's how it looks like:

##### In the LocalStack container

```bash
drwxr-xr-x 8 root root   256 Jul 10 15:26 .
drwxr-xr-x 1 root root  4096 Jul 10 15:24 ..
drwxr-xr-x 3 root root    96 Jul 10 07:28 .terraform
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root  1406 Jul 10 07:28 .terraform.lock.hcl
-rwxrwxrwx 1 root root  5563 Jul  7 06:51 main.tf
drwxr-xr-x 3 root root    96 Jul 10 07:28 target
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 23620 Jul 10 15:26 terraform.tfstate
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 23620 Jul 10 15:25 terraform.tfstate.backup
```

##### On MacOS

```bash
drwxr-xr-x@  9 user  staff    288 Jul 10 00:28 ./
drwxr-xr-x@ 19 user  staff    608 Jul 10 00:28 ../
drwxr-xr-x   3 user  staff     96 Jul 10 00:28 .terraform/
-rw-r--r--   1 user  staff   1406 Jul 10 00:28 .terraform.lock.hcl
-rw-------   1 user  staff    202 Jul 10 00:28 .terraform.tfstate.lock.info
-rw-r--r--   1 user  staff   3798 Jul 10 00:28 localstack_providers_override.tf
-rwxrwxrwx@  1 user  staff   5563 Jul  6 23:51 main.tf
drwxr-xr-x   3 user  staff     96 Jul 10 00:28 target/
-rw-r--r--   1 user  staff  17338 Jul 10 00:29 terraform.tfstate

> ```

Reviewer 2: It would be preferred to use the tabpane shortcode here to make it easy to switch between tabs and let the users look for the difference themselves

> ### Using multiple TF files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Using multiple Terraform files
```

Author: this one is fine
